\chapter{Cause specific mortality rates: alcohol dependence}
\label{applications-csmr}

A key assumption of the GBD 2010 study is that only one cause leads to
death.  This categorical distribution of deaths creates a rate that
does not directly correspond to any rate in the compartmental model
(Figure \ref{forward-sim-two-compartment}) by assuming those who die
\emph{with} the condition die \emph{of} the condition.  While this is
a reasonable assumption for many conditions such as cirrhosis,
diarrhea or transport injuries, it is not for conditions such as
Parkinson's disease or alcohol dependence.

Alcohol dependence is the dysfunctional pattern of alcohol consumption
that leads to physiological dependence and impaired control.  Like
cocaine dependence in Chapter \ref{applications-splines_knot_loc}, to
be diagnosed with alcohol dependence, three of more of the seven
substance dependence criteria defined by the American Psychiatric
Association on page \pageref{page:app-substance_dependence} must be
fulfilled. \cite{american_diagnostic_2000, hasin_prevalence_2007}
Systematic review yielded prevalence, excess mortality and
cause-specific mortality data as seen in Figure \ref{fig:app-alcohol
  data}.

    \begin{figure}[h]
        \begin{center}
            \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{alcohol-data.pdf}
            \caption{Prevalence (panel (a)), incidence (panel (b)),
              cause-specific mortality (panel (c)) and excess
              mortality (panel (d)) of alcohol dependence in Western
              European males in 2005.}
            \label{fig:app-alcohol data}
        \end{center}
    \end{figure}

To include cause-specific mortality data in the compartmental model,
the model in Figure \ref{forward-sim-two-compartment} can be adapted
by splitting the excess mortality, $h_{f}$, into two parts (Figure
\ref{fig:two_compartment_2f})--those who die \emph{from} the
condition, $h_{f'}$, and those who die \emph{with} the condition but
\emph{not of} it, $h_{f''}$.  As described in Section
\ref{theory-csmr}, excess mortality can then be represented as the
following:
    \begin{equation}
        h_{f} = h_{f''} + h_{f'}
    \end{equation}
While the product of excess mortality and prevalence, $h_{p}*h_{f}$,
can be directly measured, in practice $h_{f''}$ and $h_{f'}$ are never
disentangled.  This method implicitly separates $h_{f'}$ and $h_{f''}$
but does not try to explicitly represent both.

    \begin{figure}[h]
        \begin{center}
            \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{SC2.pdf}
            \caption{The two-compartment mechanistic model with the
              excess mortality split into two hazards.}
            \label{fig:two_compartment_2f}
        \end{center}
    \end{figure}

Many times in the GBD 2010 study, it is a reasonable assumption that
$h_{f''} = 0$, so that those who die with the condition die of it.
When this is the case, the cause-specific mortality is a direct
estimate of $h_{p}*h_{f}$.  However, for diseases such as alcohol
dependence, this is a poor assumption, as many die with the condition
but not \emph{of} it.  When $h_{f''} \neq 0$, cause-specific mortality
data provide the lower bound of $h_{p}*h_{f}$.  As seen in Figure
\ref{fig:app-alcohol compare}, modeling cause-specific mortality as
$h_{f''}$ (left column, panels (a), (c) and (e)) or as $h_{f'}$ (right
column, panels (b), (d) and (f)) only change the uncertainty of the
parameter estimates and elevates the cause-specific mortality
estimates while other parameter estimates remain the same.

    \begin{figure}[h]
        \begin{center}
            \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{alcohol-csmr_v_pf.pdf}
            \caption{Comparison of prevalence (panels (a) and (b)),
              cause-specific mortality (panels (c) and (d)) and excess
              mortality (panels (e) and (f)) estimates of alcohol
              dependence in Western European males in 2005 when using
              cause-specific mortality data as a lower bound (panels
              (a, c, e)) or a direct estimate of the product of
              prevalence and excess mortality (panels (b, d, f)).}
            \label{fig:app-alcohol compare}
        \end{center}
    \end{figure}
