\section{Introduction}
\emph{Integrative systems modeling of disease in populations} is the
first book length treatment of model-based meta-analytic methods for
descriptive epidemiology.  It develops, from first principles, the
system dynamics model which constitutes the theoretical foundation of
Years Lived with Disability (YLD) estimation in burden of disease
studies.  This compartmental model of the progression of disease
through a population has been used for over ten years in global health
epidemiology in the popular generic disease modeling system DisMod II,
distributed by the World Health Organization.  However, until now the
description of the model and the methods behind the software have been
scattered through the scientific literature in a loose collection of
journal articles and operations manuals.

In addition to collecting the prior work on compartmental modeling of
disease together in one place, this book significantly extends the
model, by formally connecting the system dynamics model of disease
progression to a statistical model of epidemiological rates, the kind
that are calculated in descriptive epidemiological research and
collected through systematic review.  This combination of systems
dynamics modeling and statistical model, which I call
\emph{integrative systems modeling} allows the model to integrate all
available relevant data.  Because advanced numerical algorithms are
needed to fit these complex models, a section of the book provides the
necessary background on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) computation.

Experience with the results of systematic review indicates that when
all available relevant data is collected, it is often very
\emph{sparse} and very \emph{noisy}.  The integrative systems models
developed in this book focus particularly on techniques for handling
sparse, noisy data.  The book explores statistical models for
over-dispersed count data, covariate modeling to both explain
systematic variation in epidemiological rate data and increase
predictive accuracy for estimates for subpopulations where no data is
available, and age pattern modeling to systematically incorporate
expert knowledge about how quickly epidemiological rates can vary as a
function of age.  It also develops a novel theory of age group
modeling to address heterogeneity in age groups commonly found during
systematic review.

The theoretical foundations of integrative systems modeling of disease
in populations are complemented with a series of applications of the
model to meta-analysis of more than a dozen different diseases.  These
practical applications provide a unique opportunity to see how the
model performs in a variety of scenarios, and also demonstrate how the
model performs when the model assumptions are violated, and how to
work around model assumption violations.

The book concludes with a detailed description of the future
directions for research in model-based meta-analysis of descriptive
epidemiological data and integrative systems modeling for global
health.
